#Decision Context

With more than 1,100 new residents per week, it’s safe to say that Seattle is experiencing unprecedented growth. A burgeoning tech economy, nearby industrial centers, desirable cultural hubs, and a transit system to link them all together is a captivating draw for many potential newcomers. There are several aspects of this growth that are very beneficial for current and future residents; more jobs along the economic spectrum and general investment in neighborhoods have the potential to increase the wellbeing of many Seattleites. However, with this influx comes some deleterious consequences as well - mostly in regards to increases in cost of living. These increases are largely due to rising demand for housing, driving up property values. The reason for this is simple. With more people coming into the city with well paying jobs, the more property owners can ask of purchasers or renters in both residential and commercial buildings. 
There are few who wouldn’t call what’s happening with housing in Seattle a crises. However, taking one step from ascribing the problem to forming a potential solution and you’ll see the many factions arise, generally based on political orientation. Some say that we need rent control, a set of policies that regulates the price that can be asked of renters based on income and cost of living. Others say that Seattle should relax regulations on land so that demand can be met by constructing enough housing to satisfy current demand. There are issues presented by both arguments. With rent control, many argue that the issue of demand is not addressed. This perspective holds that developers will not have adequate incentive to build additional housing, however the desire to live in Seattle will still exist due to jobs and such, therefore those who wish to live in the city will instead opt to settle in outlying areas, increasing urban sprawl and traffic. Advocates of deregulation are opposed because of the issue of displacement and destruction that comes with new development. If developing becomes increasingly profitable there is little stopping firms from purchasing land to develop higher density uses, changing houses to apartments and apartments to midrises. This trend threatens neighborhoods like the Central District which was shaped by exclusionary housing policies like redlining and racially restrictive covenants, who have developed a robust set of assets serving the specific needs of the historically black community such as medical centers, parks, religious centers, and senior living homes.
Facing this difficult issue, the Murray administration did what it is best known for, locking a bunch of people in a room until they come up with something the Mayor liked. Thus the Housing Affordability and Liveability Agenda (HALA) was born. This agenda is a set of 65 recommendations to the city government aimed at addressing the multifaceted issues contributing to the housing affordability crisis. The top item on the agenda? Mandatory Housing Affordability (MHA), a policy that promises to bring an approach to housing policy that addresses both equity and growth.
MHA has two main mechanisms. First, it induces growth by changing the zoning law in specific areas to allow for higher development capacity. Areas impacted by zoning will increase by at least 10’ of allowed height at a minimum, in certain neighborhoods like the University District, MHA adds over 100’ of allowed height. Second, it requires developers to contribute to affordable housing (hence the ‘A’ for affordability.) This is enacted by either a fee per square foot of new development 
This has been enacted in several neighborhoods already such as the University District, Downtown Seattle, Lower Queen Anne, and the International District. This is expected to be applied to all of the ‘urban villages’ (major neighborhoods identified by the 1995 comprehensive plan) throughout the city, along with other commercial areas. Before much of this occurs, the city will further analyze the impact of the zoning change by completing an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS). This identifies several different options for the city consider when it comes to applying this change. The main options are a no-action alternative where the city stops all changes in zoning, adding the planned MHA zoning increases, or a opportunity/displacement based MHA zoning adjustment. To explain the last option further - this final option essentially identifies with urban villages have high or low opportunity, this would make an area more desirable due to access to transit, amenities, jobs, etc. It also identifies urban villages that have high or low risk of displacement, which would make an area less resilient to increased property values due to the higher proportion of renters. Based on a matrix of high versus low opportunity and displacement risk, a new zoning map takes into account 
Our question is: Which alternative should Seattle choose for the EIS of the Mandatory Housing Affordability (MHA) program? No zoning change, zoning change based on initial map, or zoning change based on opportunity/displacement matrix?

We’ll be analyzing data for permits from Department of Construction and Permitting, data for property value from King County Assessor's Office and possibly Zillow, data for current zoning from office of Planning and Development, data for changes in zoning from City of Seattle HALA committee and office of Planning and Development.

#Technical Description
Our final product will be a Shiny app, in order to showcase our findings and summarize our takeaways and recommendations from our data collection.
As of now, a specific data collection challenge is that much of the data that we have found is in charts and visualizations from the City of Seattle, either finding the original data or extracting the data from charts will be one of our first challenges. I anticipate that we will have to use web scraping and data cleaning for this project, and while we have gone over these in class, these are fairly new skills that we will need to solidify throughout our project. We will have to deal with new libraries and becoming acquainted with the capabilities of those libraries for our data wrangling purposes.

As we plan how conduct our analysis, modeling will be a challenge as well as a new technical skill that we will be improving on. We will model the data based on data of zoning change and the impacts of zoning changes. Modeling the opportunity/displacement matrix could be done through Bayesian modeling.  

	Some of the major challenges that we anticipate is combining all the data and cleaning it to only have relevant data, as well as clearly drawing the line between each milestones. In our project plan, we anticipated in dividing the project into four checkpoints and logistically figuring out if we accomplished our goals for each section might be a difficult call. In addition, with our limited knowledge with data wrangling and data modeling, another challenge might be finding the right data modeling to represent our data. 

#Project Plan:
Check-ins : Fridays 12PM
End of Week 6 Deliverable (11/10)
Demonstrating that our initial assumptions about the data we have available to us is valid  
Evaluating our scope based on our findings
Dividing further responsibilities and clarifying group member’s expectations of project
Week 7 Midpoint Check (11/17)
Check to see how much we have gotten done and how much more we would need to do
Estimate the time that the rest of the study would take and prioritize accordingly
Week 8.5 Evaluation (11/24)
Confirm that our project is on schedule for completion
Confirm that our project answers the research question
Final deliverable Check (12/1)	
Ensure that our project is functioning as we desire it to be
Push up final changes, delegate final responsibilities, and plan project presentation
**Final Presentation (12/4 & 12/6)**

##Potential Risks:
Not enough data to fully conduct our research
Mitigation: If we don’t have enough data related to our research question, we could change our research question slightly to gear it towards a different decision maker.
i.e. if our decision makers are the home buyers and we can’t find the data for average mortgage payment, then we could change our direction towards trying to find data for small business owners and how much rent they pay on average in Seattle and how that compares to the raises in minimum house price
Data sources we found are too broad 
Mitigation: Scope our research question down to be more specific and find more data sources to support the redefined research question


